# Splore

The command `splore` is used to launch an in-process game browser. The `splore`
tool provides several updatable game lists.

This first of these is the `favorites` view. It will be empty to start.
Whenever you select a cart, you have the option to tag it as a favorite so it
shows up here.

![Favorites](./splore_favorites.png)

Pressing the `R` arrow takes you to the *Game Jam* section. These are carts
created during *Game Jams* which are time limited competitions where
participants write a game using a common theme as inspiration.

![Game Jams](./splore_jam.png)

Press `R` to see a list of randomly chosen games. If you are tired of going
through the featured list, this is sometimes a good way to find something new.

![Lucky Draw](./splore_lucky.png)

Press `R` again to go to a list of `new` games. These are the most recent
community uploads. The quality of the games in this list is going to be hit or
miss. Not all of them will be complete.

![New](./splore_new.png)

Press `R` again to see my favorite list, the `featured` list. These are
usually very high quality games or demos that highlight what is possible using
PICO-8. My kids greatly enjoy going through this list and playing the games
that catch their eye.

![Featured](./splore_featured.png)

The next section is one that lets you search for games. This is helpful if you
have a particular game you are trying to find or want to see what the community
has made on a specific topic.

![!Search](./splore_search.png)

The final section lets you browse your local files. These are the same files
you will see by running `ls` from the command prompt.

![Folders](./splore_folders.png)

# Browsing Games

Let's go back to the `featured` list. Press `enter` to update the list. This
requires Internet access! It will data about a number of games.

![Featured](./splore_featured.png)

If you don't have Internet access, run the `install_demos` command to install
and run a few demo carts.

![Install Demos](/overview/pico8_jelpi.png)

Use the arrow keys to navigate the list.

![Browse](./splore_browse.png)

If you press `enter` on a game, you will have the option to `run` or `favorite`
the game.

![Options](./splore_options.png)

Choosing `run` will start the game. Most games give show a title screen and
main menu. Some, like `flip knight` do not. Nearly all games can be controlled
using a combination of the arrow keys and the action keys (z and x). z maps to
`X` and x maps to `O`. When in doubt, just start pressing the action keys to
see what happens!

![Run](./splore_run.png)

Press `esc` and choose `exit to splore` if you want to exit the game.

![Run Options](./splore_run_options.png)


